last lecture we introduced the notion of
the limit of a function as x goes to c
which we write limit
x arrow c f of x equals l what does this
mean this means for all epsilon positive
there exists a delta positive such that
for all x and s satisfying 0 is less
than x minus c is less than delta
we have that f of x minus l is less than
epsilon okay
and
we proved the following theorem last
time that
uh if we have a set a cluster point of s
so this is where uh we look at limits
and f as a function from s to r then
the limit as x goes to c of f of x
equals l if and only if um for every
sequence
x sub n
uh converging to c we have f of x n
the new sequence converges to l okay so
this theorem here
connects
um limits of functions to what we did
previously uh limits of sequences okay
now using this theorem we'll get analogs
[Applause]
of
theorems we prove for sequences
but now for limits
first let me show a few simple
applications of this theorem
um
so for example we could prove the
following that
for all c and r
the limit as x goes to c
of x squared
equals c squared okay so we could have
done this uh
this using the
just the definition but now with this
theorem we can prove it a little bit
quicker and easier
so
because we essentially did all the hard
work when
um
we proved
that the product of two convergent
sequences is convergent so
which is what we'll use here
so uh
we're going to prove this theorem using
the previous theorem
so let
x in
so in this
for this theorem since it's not stated
you should
take the function to be f of x equals x
squared and then the set that is defined
on s is equal to r so let x n be a
sequence
such that xn converges to c as n goes to
infinity
we now want to show that f of x n
converges to f of c where f of x equals
x squared
but this follows from what we proved for
limits right so we proved the
product of two convergent
sequences is convergent
by
earlier theorem
about the product of
convergent sequences
we get that
xn squared converges to
c squared
which implies so we've now verified for
every sequence converging to c
f of x in meaning x n squared converges
to f of converges to c squared
and therefore by
the previous theorem
we've proven the claim
okay
so now let's use uh this theorem to
study a couple of more limits
and we'll use this theorem uh in fact to
show that a certain limit does not exist
so
the limit as x goes to 0
of sine 1 over x
this
limit does not exist
so remember uh for a limit i look at all
those fun all those points x
that are close to c but not equal to c
all right so
this function which i'm taking the limit
as x goes to 0 of
doesn't need to be defined at x equals 0
in order to consider the limit
all right
and
if you'd like
the function sine of 1 over x is defined
on s equals
r take away
0.
so this limit does not exist
but
the limit as x goes to 0 of x times
sine of 1 over x does exist
and equals 0.
okay
now i want you to note something you
can't just stick in x equals 0 here all
right to evaluate the limit i mean
because then you'll be taking sine of
one over zero
times zero you can't divide by zero so
it's
this uh
you can't just say this limit equals
zero because i stick in x equals zero in
fact we saw
in the previous lecture that
the limit need not equal the function
evaluated
at that point so just to recall the
example from last time
when i had f of x
equals
1 if x equals 0 and 2 if x does not
equal 0 then we showed that
limit as x goes to 0 of f of x
equals 2 which no does not equal f of 0.
okay when we discuss continuity that's
what
connects the limit to the function
evaluated at that point i just want to
make that little comment
okay to prove this theorem we're going
to use again the previous theorem maybe
i should uh
um no i'm not going to label it you'll
know when i point up to it that i'm
referring to that theorem that i stated
up there
so
in fact let's prove the second
limit
exist and equal 0 first
okay so
suppose
x n
is a sequence converging to zero we we
now want to show
uh
that x of n
times sine of
one over x sub n converges to zero okay
and then that by
the previous theorem up there will
imply that the limit as x goes to 0 of x
times sine of 1 over x equals 0.
okay
now if i look at the absolute value
of x of n times sine of 1 over x of n
this is equal to the absolute value of x
sub n times the absolute value of sine
of 1 over x sub n
and no matter what you stick into sine
sine is always bounded between one and
minus one so the absolute value is
always bounded by one
so just to
summarize we've shown that
okay
and now we apply the squeeze theorem so
if you like that goes to zero it's just
uh the constant sequence equal to zero
since x sub n is converging to zero
remember we're assuming that
this converges to zero and therefore
what gets
trapped in between goes to zero
so by squeeze theorem
x sub n times sine of one over x sub n
converges to zero and that proves
proves the second claim
okay
okay so now we'll prove one
and
in the previous lecture i did negate
this definition so let's uh actually
negate this theorem if you like or
use the
negation of each side of
this if and only if um
to state uh equivalent theorem
so
so two statements are equivalent which
is in that theorem if and only if their
negations are also equivalent so
by the theorem we also have the
following
fact
limit x goes to c of f of x does not
equal l
if and only if
there exists
so negating the right hand side of that
if and only if there exists a sequence
xn converging to c
um
so this sequence will
consisting of elements of s take away c
such that x n converges to c but we
don't have
f x n converging to l
and
okay and when i write this you should
read this as either this limit exists
and does not equal l or this limit does
not exist
okay
so i'll even write that out
so and
either
limit
does not exist
or
does not equal l
okay
so again that's an equivalent way of
stating the theorem
up there is in terms of the negation two
statements are equivalent
which is uh right there
if and only if their negations are
equivalent
all right so
now we're going to prove
that the limit as x goes to zero of sine
of one over x does not exist by showing
that there exists a sequence converging
to zero
such that when i plug that into sine
the limit of that sequence does not
exist
so
to show
there exists a sequence converging to
zero such that
limit as n goes to
infinity of sine of 1 over x
sub n
does not exist
okay
now
sine oscillates between
1 and minus 1 depending on if i'm a
certain multiple of pi over 2
right
so here's the here's the the intuition
behind it
behind the sequence i'm about to give
you
note that
sine
of
let's say sine of x equals 1
if x equals
pi over 2
um
5 pi over 2
9 pi over 2 and so on
minus 1
if
x equals 3 pi over 2
7 pi over 2
11 pi over 2 and so on
so i can stick in
things that are getting bigger
to sign and get one or minus one and in
fact let me
change this to y since we're using x
to be essentially 1 over y
okay so if i stick in pi over 2 5 pi
over 2 9 pi over 2 and so on i get sine
equals 1 if it's 3 pi over 2 7 pi over 2
11 pi over 2 and i stick that into sine
i get minus 1. okay
but that means if i stick
one over these numbers
into sine of one over x
i get one
or minus one
and so then that sequence that i get
will be one or minus one uh alternating
and we know that sequence does not
converge so that's the idea so let me uh
write that down
let x sub n be
1 over these numbers essentially so
2 n minus 1
pi over 2
minus 1
because we're going to stick this into
sine of 1 over
x so let me just
which is 2 over
2 n minus 1 over pi
now note
we're all in
x sub n is less than or equal to
i can write this as 2 over n plus n
minus 1
pi
and since n is bigger than or equal to 1
this is always bigger than or equal to
zero so this is less than or equal to
two
over n pi and this goes to zero so that
shows by the squeeze theorem
that this sequence i've defined here
converges to zero
but what happens when i plug this
sequence into sine of one over x
this is now equal to
sine of
2n minus 1
pi
over 2.
okay and this is therefore
equal to one minus one one minus one one
minus one
okay
and this sequence which is just equal to
minus one to the n plus one
why i capitalize that does not
converge
okay
so
we found a sequence converging to zero
such that when i stick it into the
function
that new sequence does not converge so
we've proven that
this limit does not exist
all right so
i alluded to
this fact that this theorem will give us
theorems that are similar to what we
prove for sequences except now for
limits of functions so let me just state
kind of the simplest theorem
you can get
so
let us be a subset of r
see a cluster point of s
and suppose i have two functions
f going from s to r
and g going from s to r
okay
if
these two limits exist
and one
function is smaller than the other
then so we had an analogous statement
for
um
sequences which was if i have two
sequences converging and one is less
than or equal to the other then the
limits are
uh one limit is uh less than or equal to
the other
and it's
an analogous conclusion for limits of
functions
okay
so again the
analogous statement for sequences was we
have two sequences one less than or
equal to the other which then the limit
of the smaller sequence is less than or
equal to the limit of the bigger
sequence
okay
um
so let's give the proof
and we'll use this theorem
connecting limits of functions to limits
of sequences and then we'll use the
corresponding statement which we do have
for for sequences which i just stated a
couple of times
so
um
let l1 be
the limit as x goes to c of f of x
and l2 the
limit as x goes to c
of g of x
and what we want to show is that l1 is
less than or equal to l2 right
ok
let x n
be the sequence
and s take away c
such that
x n converges to c such a sequence such
a sequence exists because c is a
cluster point of s all right you proved
in the assignment that if i have a
cluster point of s then there exists a
sequence
in s take away c that converges to c
now since
um
stated this way by the previous theorem
this limit equals l1 this limit equals
l2 if and only if for every sequence
converging to c f of x n converges to l
one at g of x n converges to l two
by the previous theorem we then conclude
that l1
is equal to the limit as n goes to
infinity
actually i'm getting ahead of myself a
little bit
so let's uh pause right there and reset
so now we have the sequence converging
to c
then by the assumption
here
for all n
f of x in is less than or equal to g of
x n
and
since
f of x n converges to l one
and f of
x n converges g of xn converges
to l2
we get by again this theorem about
sequences which says if i have two
sequences
f of x sub n this is a one sequence is
less than or equal to
another sequence g of x in
and they both converge then the limits
uh satisfy the same inequality
okay
which is what we wanted to prove
okay um so
like i said this theorem here follows
from the analogous uh
um
in fact i should have written this out
uh
or in fact i will write it out now so
the analogous statement for sequences
was
um if we're all in a n is less than or
equal to b in
then
limit as n goes to infinity assuming
both
limits exist
um satisfy the same inequality okay so
this is a analogous theorem to
this theorem which we had for sequences
and we used this theorem from sequences
to prove it okay
now following that same
philosophy you can prove analogous
statements for
uh functions limits of functions as you
did
from sequences you get these for free
instead of stating all of the theorems
we did for sequences except now for
limits of functions i'm just going to
kind of quickly say you know you get the
same thing so
by using uh
the previous theorem which connects
sequences of
which connects convergence of
functions to convergence of sequences
we have
analogous
analogous theorems four
and let me state it this way
or limits of functions now
and for example you have a squeeze
theorem
namely if i have so just talking this
out if i have three functions
say f is less than or equal to g is less
than or equal to h and f of x and this
converges to l
h of x converges to l then g of x
converges to l okay that's what i mean
by analogous statement
you also have
theorems about algebraic
operations and limits
meaning um
that if i have two functions
that
have limits as x goes to c then f plus g
will have a limit as x goes to c and
that the limit of the sum is the sum of
the limits same thing with the product
and uh
same thing with
the quotient assuming the limit on the
bottom is non-zero
and then similarly we also have a
theorem about the absolute value
and limits namely if f of x converges
to l as x goes to c then the absolute
value of f of x converges to the
absolute value of l as x goes to c so
you have all of these analogous
statements
or theorems that are analogous to the
statements from
uh what we did for sequences but now for
limits of functions as as x goes to c
okay and i'm not going to state them all
um
you can see this in the textbook right
maybe the proof of some of them i'll
give as exercises
all right
now let's separate the
notion of a limit of a function from
that of a sequence
just a little bit
so
unlike when we talk about limits of
sequences here we're letting a point x
converge
or get close to a point c
but there's two ways it can get uh close
to c
on the real number line it can converge
to c from the left
or it can converge to c from the right
and this leads to the notion of left and
right limits of a function
left and right limits of
functions
so
[Applause]
start the definition here we'll go to
the next board so
let s be a
subset of r
and suppose
c is
a cluster point
of
minus infinity 0 intersect c
intersect s
okay
so what i'm defining now is the notion
of a function converging to something as
x goes to c from the left okay that's
why i'm looking at only s intersect
minus infinity to c so i'm only looking
to the left of c
we say
f x converges to l
as x converges to c from the left
by
putting a minus sign up here
if
it's a similar
definition as that of a theorem or that
of the limit
but now we only look at x getting close
to c from the left if for all epsilon
positive there exists
a delta positive
that for all
x and
s
satisfying
c minus delta is less than x is less
than c so it's close to c but to the
left of c
we have that f of x
minus l
is less than epsilon
okay and in this case
uh
we write the limit as x goes to c with a
minus sign up top
f of x
equals l
okay
[Applause]
and then we have an analogous uh
definition for converging to uh or
taking a limit of a function as x goes
to c from the right
so c is
the cluster point
of
c infinity
uh c comma infinity intersect s
so i shouldn't say if
suppose c is a cluster point of
now just taking s that's to the right of
c
then we say that
f of x converges to l
as x
converges to c plus meaning as x
converges to c from the right
if
we're all epsilon positive there exists
a delta positive
such that for all
x and s satisfying
c is less than x is less than c plus
delta so now it's close to
c but to the right of c
we have that f of x minus l
is less than epsilon okay and similarly
to
the notation uh
up there we write limit as x goes to c
plus
of f of x equals l
okay
now
you know just like we proved this
theorem for limits you can state and
prove an analogous statement
for
one-sided limits so such a statement
would be
for example
limit as x goes to c minus of f of x
equals l if and only if for every
sequence
x sub n
satisfying x sub n is less than c
uh converging to c we have f of x n
converges to l okay so
these two just kind of limit
how
f behaves near a point c if we're just
looking to the left of c or to the right
of c
okay
but not at c so let's
for example look at uh
i think this is usually referred to as
the heavy side function so f of x equals
zero for x
less than or equal to zero and one
if x is less bigger than or equal to
zero
okay so
graph
is like that
and why do why do you know people care
about this function well
in a certain sense if you take the
derivative of this function you get
what's called the dirac delta
function although that's not a function
that's a distribution um but
you know that's why this function has a
name to attach to it because if you take
its derivative you get something
um
somewhat special
anyways we're not interest we're not
even at derivatives we're not even going
to talk about distributions in this
class so let's get back to uh one-sided
limits
so
uh if i look at this function for x
close to zero from the left
f is just zero so
so in fact i can since i'm only looking
at x to the left of zero in this limit
this is just plugging in x less than
zero so i get zero
and that's just zero
and if i look at this function from the
right
to the right of zero then f of x is just
one it's just one identically and so i
get
and it's again so although i haven't
shown that
one-sided limits of constants equal to
constant i think that should be
something you can easily believe or
write out yourself so for this function
we see that
it does have two-sided limits except
those limits don't equal each other okay
and they certainly don't equal so you
know this one
does equal f of 0 but i could have
made f of 0 to be a half and then this
still would have been 0 and not equal to
the function evaluated at the point so
again i'm making this
point that for limits okay just limits
it does not matter what the function is
doing at the point all right
limit only cares about how a function
behaves near a point one-sided limits
augment that by saying we're only going
to care about the function
near the point and to the left for the
left limit and
to the right for the right limit so i
didn't say that but this we call the
left limit this we call the right limit
simply because we're coming getting
close to c from the right
and from the left
okay
all right so
but what is
the connection between left
and right limits
we have the following so
let
s be a subset of r
f be a function from s to r
and suppose that c is
a cluster point
of both sets minus infinity to c
intersect s
and
c infinity intersect s okay that way i
can talk about the left and right limits
of c
uh
or at c
then
so first off
um if c is a cluster point of any one of
these sets it's going to be a cluster
point of the set s okay so we can
actually look at uh the limit
so then the limit as x goes to c of f of
x
exists and equals l
if and only if
the limit as x goes to c from the left
of f of x
equals the limit as x goes to c from the
right
of f of x
equals l
okay
so you know this kind of looks like the
theorem we proved about limb soup and
lemf but
you know they don't have any they don't
have any connection um
okay
you know so
okay kind of what uh
if you want to make some sort of
connection between
the way this theorem looks and the
statement of the theorem for limp and
limb soup so this is kind of saying that
um
limit of a function equals l if
we approach from the left or right
the f the function f approaches l
okay
and for the limb soup limb inf guy that
we did for sequences you could take that
as saying that the limit of a sequence
equals l if and only if
um kind of following the sequence from
below
that approaches l and following the
sequence from above that also approaches
l okay so
you know there's kind of two directions
there just as there's two directions
here but
not really okay
so let's give a quick proof of
the serum
it's not difficult it follows almost
immediately from
the definitions
in fact i'm going to do only one
direction
so kind of this direction should
uh
assuming this
and proving this
should be pretty clear okay
if i have this this means that
you know if i want to be close to l i
just need to be close to c
and therefore it doesn't matter if i'm
close to c from the left or right i'll
be close to l
and going this direction this says i
just need to be close to c from the left
sufficiently close and i need to be
close to c from the right sufficiently
close to be close to l okay
um
you know so
really there's not
a lot of um trickiness in the proof it's
just writing these things out and so i'm
just going to write out one direction
and leave the other direction to you
so let's assume
that
left limit equals the right limit
equals l and now we want to show that
the limit as x goes to c of f of x
equals l
okay
now we want to show
limit as x goes to c of f of x
equals l
so let's go back to the definition let
epsilon be positive we want to be able
to find a delta
so that
uh f of x is within
epsilon to l if x is within delta to c
and what's the point here's c
and
here's l
so this is the picture that goes along
with this
assuming these two limits equal l i know
that if
that there exists a delta one so that if
i'm in
this interval
then and here's
l plus epsilon
l minus epsilon
then
if i'm within delta 1 to c and to the
left then f will
f will be close to l in that interval
okay
and then since the limit as x goes to c
from the right equals l there exists
some delta two so that if i'm in this
interval then i'll be again close to
l
okay but this means that if i choose the
smaller of these two
and i look at the whole interval then f
will be close to l on the whole interval
and that's it okay
so let epsilon be positive
since
limit as x goes to c minus f of x equals
l
this implies there exists
delta 1 positive such that
if
x minus c is less than delta 1 then i
get that f of x
if c minus delta 1 is less than x is
less than delta less than c
this implies that f of x minus l is less
than epsilon
and similarly for the right limit
since
the limit as x goes to c plus of f of x
equals l
this implies
by the definition there exists a delta 2
positive
such that
if
c is less than x is less than c plus
delta 2 then i get
f of x minus l is less than epsilon
now choose
delta to be the minimum
of delta 1
delta 2.
and then we'll now show that this delta
works
um okay so now we're going to show this
delta works
um
so if
it's less than delta then this implies
that
either
x is in
c minus delta
so if we take something close within
delta to c and delta's the minimum of
these two distances then
for the sake of this picture let's say
delta one equals delta two so now i'm
looking at this interval then
um
two cases either x's and c minus delta c
which is a subset of c minus delta 1 c
since delta is the minimum of those two
those two deltas
which implies
by the first inequality
here
for delta 1
or
x is in
c c plus delta which is a subset of
c c plus delta two
which
by
our choice of delta two
gives us that
thus we've shown that
if x minus c is less than delta
then
f of x minus l is less than epsilon
that's the end of the proof
okay so
i've said this over and over again
limits don't limits the functions don't
care about what the function is doing at
the point cares about what the function
is doing near the point
now we're going to discuss
the notion of
continuity
which
connects the limit of a function at a
point
to
the function so it connects how a
function behaves near a point
to the function evaluated at the point
okay
and
so
you can even write this down
how a function behaves near a point
compared to
so near
s
point
okay
and you'll see from from writing when i
write down the definition basically
it's
um what's kind of staring you in the
face is that
uh the definition of continuity is that
the limit as x goes to c of f of x
equals f of c right so we had these
examples where the limit
uh
i think already erased it but
where the limit exists but does not
equal f of c
and
here for continuity the notion of
continuity is that the limit as x goes
to c of f of x actually equals the
function evaluated at that point so
we have the following definition
let s be a subset of r and see an
element of s
okay
we say f
is
continuous at c
if for all epsilon positive
there exists a delta positive such
that um
for all x and s satisfying
x minus c is less than delta so in
particular look uh
i can now
for example x equals c will satisfy this
inequality i don't have the 0 is less
than that
so for all x and s which are close to c
within delta i have that f of x
will be
with an epsilon of f of c
okay
so in this case
so just a little uh
if f
is continuous
at every point
on its domain that we're considering we
just say f is continuous
so
okay
[Applause]
for a function to be continuous at a
point
nearby x x being near c
should mean that f of x
should be near f c
okay
and we'll go through let's go through
some examples remember whenever you get
a definition you should
look for examples
and then potentially negate it
will
negate this definition in just a second
to show that a function i
wrote down a minute ago is not
continuous
so
the function so the affine function f of
x equals a times x plus b
uh
x
so s is r so x is um a real number
is
a continuous function meaning it's
continuous at every real number c
all right so let's prove this
let's see be an element of r we want to
show f is continuous at c so we have to
go through the definition
let epsilon be positive
choose
delta to be
epsilon over one plus absolute value of
a
okay and
last time in the previous lecture i kind
of
gave the intuition on why you would
choose this delta based on
the function
uh
and uh epsilon
i did a computation here i'm just going
to choose delta this way and you'll see
that it works so now we have to show
this delta works
if
x minus c is less than delta
we should be able to now show that f of
x minus
f of c is less than epsilon
this is equal to ax plus b minus ac plus
b so this is equal to a times x minus c
which equals absolute value of a times
absolute value of x minus c
this is
less than
delta
absolute value of x minus c is less than
times a which equals
the absolute value of a over one plus
the absolute value of a times epsilon
which is less than epsilon okay
because
a number over one plus that number is
always less than one
okay
um maybe you were wondering why didn't i
just choose delta to be epsilon over the
absolute value of a
this is just a smidgen of sophistication
that what happens if the absolute value
of a is equal to 0 then we would have
divided by 0. so adding a 1 there um
takes care of that
okay
so this guy
is continuous at every c so this
function is
continuous
how about a function that's not
at a point
make sure this is the next topic
like here is a non-example
the function f of x which equals
1 if x equals 0
2 if x
not equal to 0 so
that's the function
uh
f is
not continuous at
zero
okay
so to prove this
let's negate the definition of
continuity
so
the negation of continuity is
so f is
not
continuous at c
if
so the for alls become their exist
and their exists become for all so if
there exists some bad epsilon
so that
for all delta positive
there exists
an x
such that
x minus c is less than delta
and we do not have
the second inequality f of x minus f of
c is bigger than or equal to this bad
epsilon okay
now for this guy
it's pretty clear which x to choose so
let's let's think this out for a minute
there should be some bad epsilon 0 so
that
if i take any
small interval around 0 i can find a
point in this interval
so that f of
x
minus f of c is going to be bigger than
or equal to epsilon 0. all right now
here f of c
is uh
f of 0 which is 1. okay
now
what would be the bad epsilon so that
f of 1 is greater than distance 1 or
greater than distance epsilon 0 to f of
x for x
for some x in this interval well
if i take any x in this interval
other than zero and stick it into f i'm
going to get two and that's with greater
than or equal to distance one
to f of zero all right so epsilon zero
i will choose to be one
okay so
now we want to prove that f this
function here is not continuous at zero
so how to tell you what the bad epsilon
is choose epsilon zero equals one
all right
so now we have to show this bad epsilon
zero is indeed bad
delta b positive we have to now find
a number in this interval so that f of x
minus f of c i mean f of 0
is bigger than or equal to 1 and like i
said a minute ago if you take any
x in this interval other than 0 and
stick it into f i get 2 which is
a distance 1 to f of 0.
x to be delta over 2 say
then
x minus zero is less than delta it's
actually equal to delta over two
and
f of x
minus f of zero
this is equal to 2 minus 1
which is bigger than or equal to epsilon
0.
okay so this function is
not continuous
and
so next time and i'll just leave this
question here
um which we'll address uh in the next
lecture but it's a kind of simple
question so first off if you look at
this function
it shouldn't be
too hard to convince yourself so
um you know you're also told
when you're a child
that a function is continuous if you can
draw the graph and not lift up the
pencil which
i better not see on the exam if i ask
you about continuity but anyways for the
sake of this conversation let's uh take
that as
the intuition so you can convince
yourself that this function is
continuous over here though right if
i'm getting close to let's say this is
-1
then
the function is getting close to 2
and the value of the function at minus
one is two so the function is getting
close to the value of the function at
minus one and the same for if i'm over
looking at c equals one so
um
you know you should be able to convince
yourself that this function is
continuous at every point other than at
the origin
0. so a natural question to ask is
let f be a function
let's say defined on
the whole real number line
does there exist
a point in r
such that f is
continuous
at this point c
okay for this example over here we were
able to you know any point other than
zero the function's continuous there
okay so a natural question is
let's say i take an arbitrary function
does it have to have a point where it's
continuous
and next time we'll see that that answer
is no we'll give a
an example that's
i think due to dirichlet because it's
named after him but you know naming
doesn't necessarily mean anything in
math green serum is named after green
but he didn't prove it so
maybe it was due to somebody else
and we'll use a
uh
similar characterization of continuity
that's kind of analogous to this first
statement we had for limits
and we'll do that next time
you